Qualitative Research in Technology-Enhanced Learning

Introduction 

This Qualitative Research chapter will mainly introduce the reader to Qualitative Research and Computer Assisted Qualitative Data Analysis (CAQDAS) through the use of NVivo, a software program used for qualitative and mixed-methods research. The chapter consists of 
two main parts. Part one starts with a general theoretical introduction on Qualitative Research, where a brief introduction to Qualitative Research theory is provided, as well as key considerations of Qualitative Data Analysis (QDA). The second part focus on how CAQDAS can support QDA. Here the reader is also guided on how to work with NVivo enter and code qualitative data with NVivo to enter and code raw data, organise coding, or cases, write memos and explore data. 

Qualitative Research
“Qualitative research is an umbrella term for a wide variety of approaches to and methods for the study of natural social life. The information or data collected and analysed is primarily (but not exclusively) nonquantitative in character, consisting of textual materials such as interview transcripts, fieldnotes, and documents, and/or visual materials such as artifacts, photographs, video recordings, and Internet sites, that document human experiences about others and/or one’s self in social action and reflective states” (Saldaña, 2011)

Analytic Approaches
According to Creswell (2007) Qualitative studies have a baffling number of choices of approaches:

Table 1. Qualitative Approaches Mentioned by Authors 
(Adapted from Creswell, 2007, pp. 7-8)

An overview of five approaches
Saldaña (2011) acknowledges the diversity of classifications or typologies in qualitative research and provides an overview of five most common approaches in which researchers across multiple disciplines work. 

Ethnography
Ethnography is the observation and documentation of social life in order to render an account of a group’s culture. Ethnography refers to both the process of long-term fieldwork and the final (most often) written product. Originally the method of anthropologists studying foreign peoples, ethnography is now multidisciplinary in its applications to explore cultures in classrooms, urban streets, organizations, and even cyberspace. 

Grounded Theory
Grounded Theory is a methodology for meticulously analysing qualitative data in order to understand human processes and to construct theory, that is, theory grounded in the data or constructed from the ground up. The originators of the methodology were Anselm Strauss and 
Barney Glasser, sociologists who in the 1960s studied illness and dying. Grounded theory is an analytic process of constantly comparing small data units, primarily but not exclusively collected from interviews, through a series of cumulative coding cycles to achieve abstraction and a range of dimensions to the emergent categories’ properties. Classic grounded theory works toward achieving a core or central category that conceptually represents what a study is all about. This core or central category becomes the foundation for generating a theory about the process observed. 

Phenomenology
Phenomenology is the study of the nature and meaning of things. The roots of this approach lie in philosophy’s early hermeneutic analysis, or the interpretation of texts for core meanings. Today, phenomenology is most often a research approach that focuses on concepts, events, or the lived experiences of humans. Some qualitative research studies take a phenomenological approach when the purpose is to come to an initiative awareness and deep understanding of how humans experience something. There are no specific methods for gathering data to develop a phenomenological analysis; interviews, participant observation, and even literary fiction, provide ample material for review. The primary task is researcher reflection on the data to capture the essence and essentials of the experience that make it what it is.

Case Study
A case study focuses on a single unit for analysis (one person, one group, one event, etc.). It involves the study of an issue explored through one or more cases within a bounded system. The data collection in case study research is typically extensive, drawing on multiple sources of information, such as observations, interviews, documents, and audiovisual materials. The type of analysis of these data can be a holistic analysis of the entire case or an embedded analysis of a specific aspect of the case. Through this data collection, a detailed description of the case emerges. After the description the researcher might focus on a few key issues (or analysis of themes), not for generalising beyond the case, but for understanding the complexity of the case. In the final interpretative phase, the researcher reports the meaning of the case.  

Content Analysis
Content analysis is the systematic examination of texts and visuals (e.g. newspapers, magazines, speech transcripts), media (e.g. films, television episodes, Internet sites), and/or material culture (e.g. artifacts, commercial products) to analyse their prominent manifest and latent meaning. A manifest meaning is one that is surface and apparent, and a latent meaning is one that is suggestive, connotative, and subtextual. Some content analysis are both qualitative and quantitative in their design since statistical frequency of occurrence becomes one important measure of salient themes, especially in texts and media.

Ethics in Qualitative Research
Social research — including research in education in technology enhanced learning— concerns people’s lives in the social world and therefore it inevitably involves ethical issues. Qualitative research often intrudes more into the human private sphere: it is inherently interested in people’s personal view and often targets sensitive matters. In order to conduct good practice in research some academic societies have formulated their codes of ethics (see, for instance, The American Sociological Association Code of Ethics: https://www.asanet.org/, or The Statement of Ethical Practices of the British Sociological Association: https://britsoc.co.uk/).
Flick (2018, p. 85) proposes the following basic ethical principles when conducting qualitative research:
●	Informed consent means that no one should be involved in research as a participant without knowing about this and without having the chance to refuse to take part.
●	Deception of research participants (by covert observation or by giving them false information about the purpose of research) should be avoided.
●	Participants’ privacy should be respected and confidentiality should be guaranteed and maintained. 
●	Accuracy of the data and their interpretation should be the leading principle, which means that no omission or fraud with the collection or analysis of data should occur in the research practice.
●	In relation to the participants, respect for the person is seen as essential.
●	Beneficence, which means considering the well-being of the participants.
●	Justice, which addresses the relation between benefits and burdens for research participants. 

Data collection methods
Qualitative data can come from different sources. This is usually transformed into textual form resulting in hundreds of pages of transcripts and field notes. Marshall and Rossman (2006) suggest four primary methods for gathering information: (1) participating in the setting, (2) observing directly, (3) interviewing in depth, and (4) analysing documents and material culture.

Participating in the setting
Participant observation was developed primarily from cultural anthropology and qualitative sociology. It is an overall approach to inquiry and a data-gathering method which demands first hand involvement in the social world chosen for study. Immersion in the setting permits the researcher to hear, to see, and to begin to experience reality as the participants do. Personal reflections are integral to the emerging analysis of a cultural group. 

Observation
Observation entails the systematic noting and recording of events, behaviours, and artifacts in the social setting chosen for study. The observational record is frequently referred to as ‘field notes’. For studies relying on observation, the researcher makes no special effort to have a particular role in the setting. Classroom studies are one example of observation in which the researcher documents and describes actions and interaction that are complex. Observation can range from a highly structured, detailed notation of behaviour structured by checklists to a more holistic description of events and behaviour. 

In-Depth Interviewing
With in-depth interviews the researcher explores a few general topics to help uncover the participant’s views. There are different types of interviews: one-to-one interviews, focus group interviews, and retrospective interviews.

One-to-one interviews, also called ‘professional conversation’ has a structure and a purpose to obtain descriptions of the life of the interviewee with respect to interpreting the meaning of a described phenomena. One-to-one interviews can occur in single or multiple sessions, and can be structured, unstructured or semi-structured.

Focus group interviews involve a group format (usually 2-12 members). This format is based on the collective experience of group brainstorming, that is, participants thinking together, inspiring and challenging each other, and reacting to the emerging issues and points. The format also allows for various degrees of structure.

Retrospective interviews come under the umbrella term of ‘introspective methods’. The data generated by this methodology is called a ‘verbal report’ or ‘verbal protocol’. The retrospective interviews, as the name suggests, happen after the task/process has been completed. In this case, the relevant information needs to be retrieved from long-term memory and thus the validity of retrospective protocols depends on the time interval between the occurrence of a thought and its verbal report. 

Review of documents
Researchers supplement participant observation, observation and interviewing gathering and analysing documents produced in the course of everyday events or constructed specifically for the research at hand. Logs, announcements, formal policy statements, websites, emails, and so on are all useful in developing an understanding of the setting or group studied. Research journals can also be quite informative. The use of documents often entails a specialised analytic approach: content analysis. 

Qualitative Data Analysis (QDA)

VIDEO: Introduction to Qualitative Coding https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=v8RlbqcR0RI 

Coding
Coding is a way of analysing that can be applied to all sorts of data and is not focused on a specific method of data collection. Coding is not the only way of analysing data, but it is the most prominent one, if the data results from observations, interviews, or review of documents. Dörney points out that “Most research texts would confirm that regardless of the specific methodology followed, qualitative data analysis invariably starts with coding.” (2007, p. 250). But, he also recognises that this statement is partially true, because usually a considerable amount of analysis has already taken place when we begin the actual coding process. This first stage, often called ‘pre-coding’, involves reading and reading the texts (i.e. transcripts, documents, etc.), reflecting on them, and noting down our thoughts in journal entries and memos. These pre-coding reflections shape our thinking about data and influence the way we will go about coding.

Initial coding
How shall we begin coding? The codes you develop may be influenced by a number of factors (Lewins & Silver, 2008, p. 83):
●	Research aims
●	Methodology and analytic approach
●	Amount, kinds and sources of data
●	Level and depth of analysis
●	Constraints
●	Research audience

There are different approaches to coding:
Table 1. Approaches to coding
Codes can be generated inductively or deductively. The inductive approach begins with a set of empirical observations, seeking patterns in those observations, and then theorizing about those patterns, that is, from salient aspects identified in the data. The deductive approach begins with a theory, developing hypotheses from that theory, and then collecting and analyzing data to test those hypotheses, that is, according to predefined areas of interest.

Second-level coding
Qualitative analytical methods contain a second-level coding process because in most investigations we want to go beyond a mere descriptive labelling of the relevant data segments. A useful process in second-level coding is to produce a hierarchy of codes, in the form of a tree diagram. 

Using a template of codes
Dörney (2008) describes the use of a template of codes as a variation on the standard coding procedures because its use does not emphasize the emergent nature of the codes but, to the contrari, starts with a template. The first of data analysis involves preparing a code manual and the texts are coded using this predetermined template. The template method can only be used if there is sufficient background information on the topic to be able to define the template categories. 

Memoing 
Throughout the analytic process researchers are encouraged to write reflective memos and notes. Marshall and Rossman (2006) suggest writing early and throughout the research process but especially during more focused analysis. 
 
Themes
Themes are also an important concept in QDA. Corbin and Strauss (2008) define them as thread or ideas that emerge from a text (i.e. an interview). While analysing one of their memos they explain:
“These [themes] have already been identified as concepts, but at this time they will be elevated to the status of category/theme not only because they seem to run  throughout the entire interview but also because they seem to be able to pull together some of the lesser concepts” (2008, p. 188)
